While contact mode detects the bending of
a cantilever, the non-contact mode vibrates a cantilever at a high resonant frequency,
and measures the force gradient by the amplitude and phase change due to the
interaction between the probe and the sample, which yields the topography of the
sample.

PRINCIPLES OF NON-CONTACT MODE IN AFM
There are two major forces, the static electric repulsive force and attractive force,
existing between atoms a short distance apart: The static electric repulsive forces (Fion)
between ion cores and the static electric attractive forces (Fel) between valence electrons
and ion cores. When the distance between the atoms at the end of the probe tip and the
atoms on the sample surface becomes much shorter, the repulsive forces between them
become dominant, and the force change due to the distance change becomes greater and
greater. Therefore, contact AFM measures surface topography by utilizing the system’s
sensitive response to the Repulsive Coulomb Interactions that exist between the ion cores
when the distance between the probe tip and the sample surface atoms is very small.
However, as shown in Figure 8-1, when the distance between the probe tip and the
sample atoms is relatively large, the attractive force Fel becomes dominant. Ion cores
become electric dipoles due to the valence electrons in the other atoms, and the force
induced by the dipole-dipole interaction is the van der Waals Force. Non-contact AFM
(NC-AFM) measures surface topography by utilizing this attractive atomic force in the
relatively larger distance between the tip and a sample surface.

Se figur 8.1: Concept diagram of Contact mode and Non-Contact mode in AFM.

Figure 8-1 compares the movement of the probe tip relative to the sample surface
for images being acquired between in contact AFM and in non-contact AFM. Contact
AFM uses the “physical contact” between the probe tip and the sample surface, whereas
non-contact AFM does not require this contact with the sample. In Non-Contact mode,
the force between the tip and the sample is very weak so that there is no unexpected
change in the sample during the measurement. Therefore, Non-Contact AFM is very
useful when a biological sample or other very soft sample is being measured; the tip will
also have an extended lifetime because it is not abraded during the scanning process.
On the other hand, the force between the tip and the sample in the non-contact regime is
very low, and it is not possible to measure the deflection of the cantilever directly. So,
Non-Contact AFM detects the changes in the phase or the vibration amplitude of the
cantilever that are induced by the attractive force between the probe tip and the sample
while the cantilever is mechanically oscillated near its resonant frequency.

A cantilever used in Non-Contact AFM typically has a resonant frequency between
100 kHz and 400 kHz with vibration amplitude of a few nanometers. Because of the
attractive force between the probe tip and the surface atoms, the cantilever vibration at its resonant frequency near the sample surface experiences a shift in spring constant from its
intrinsic spring constant ( ko ). This is called the effective spring constant (keff), and the
following equation holds:
\[k_\mathrm{eff} = k_o - F^'.\]

When the attractive force is applied, keff becomes smaller than k0 since the force
gradient F’ (=?F/?) is positive. Accordingly, the stronger the interaction between the
surface and the tip (in other words, the closer the tip is brought to the surface), the smaller
the effective spring constant becomes. This alternating current method (AC detection)
makes more sensitive responds to the force gradient as opposed to the force itself. Thus,
it is also applied in such techniques as MFM (Magnetic Force Microscopy) and DFM
(Dynamic Force Microscopy).

A bimorph is used to mechanically vibrate the cantilever. When the bimorph’s
drive frequency reaches the vicinity of the cantilever’s natural/intrinsic vibration frequency
(f0), resonance will take place, and the vibration that is transferred to the cantilever
becomes very large. This intrinsic frequency can be detected by measuring and
recording the amplitude of the cantilever vibration while scanning the drive frequency of
the voltage being applied to the bimorph. Figure 9-2 displays the relationship between
the cantilever’s amplitude and the vibration frequency. From this output, we can
determine the cantilever’s intrinsic frequency.

On the other hand, the spring constant affects the resonant frequency (f0) of the
cantilever, and the relation between the spring constant (k0) in free space and the resonant frequency (f0) is as in Equation (2).
\[f_0 = \sqrt{\frac{k_0}{m}}.\]

As in Equation (1), since keff becomes smaller than k0 due to the attractive force,
feff too becomes smaller than f0 as shown in Figure 8-3 (a). If you vibrate the cantilever at
the frequency f1 (a little larger than f0) where a steep slope is observed in the graph
representing free space frequency vs. amplitude, the amplitude change (?A) at f1 becomes
very large even with a small change of intrinsic frequency caused by atomic attractions.
Therefore, the amplitude change measured in f1 reflects the distance change (?d) between
the probe tip and the surface atoms.
